---
title: Configuring mailcap by regex
---

This blogpost is propably only useful to people with no to little knowledge of regex. In it's center stands a big shell command which I will explain most of the post.

`~/.mailcap` is a file which describes how programs should handle files with a certain MIME-type. It's essentially a list of all handled MIME-types, semicolon seperated by the according command for opening the file. `%s` stands for the filename:

```
application/pdf; evince %s;
```

My mailprogram depends on `~/.mailcap` for opening attachments. At first, I had a hard time repeatingly discovering a new MIME-type, handling it in `.mailcap` and running into another unhandled one again, until I decided to solve the problem once for ever by using grep.

My mails are stored in a directory called `~/Mail/`, but for this tutorial it is only important to have it in plaintext somewhere. By finding all the MIME-types mentioned in my mail, I generated the most complete mailcap file I can think of. The shell command for doing it is the following:

```
grep -Phor '\b((?:application|audio|example|font|image|
message|model|multipart|text|video|chemical)/[a-z]+?)\b' 
Mail/ | sort -u > ~/.mailcapx
```

Please note, that I had to split the command over several lines, but didn't figure out how to continue it through the regex. You have to remove the newlines by hand if you use it. [Please tell me](https://github.com/erictapen/erictapen.de/pulls) if you know how to fix it.

## Command explained

The command above greps through all mail for MIME-types, sorts them and makes the list consist only of unique entries and writes it into `.mailcap`. Please note that that command will overwrite your existing `.mailcap` file. Find the command tree below.

* `grep` command for searching in files.
    * `-P` use more powerful "Perl regex".
    * `-h` dont't display the name of the matching file.
    * `-o` only matching, don't show the rest of the matching line.
    * `-r` recursive, grep goes through files and subdirectories in the dir. Is not necessecary if you have a single file with your mail.
    * long regex, is explained below.
    * `Mail/` my mail directory
* `|` a "pipe", sends the result of the `grep` command into the following `sort` command. Try calling only the part before the pipe in order to understand it's use.
* `sort` sorts text
    * `-u` makes the entries of the sorted list unique
* `>` takes the result of the `sort` command and writes it into the following file. Again, try to run only the beginning of the command until this symbol to understand it's use.
* `~/` short for my home directory
* `.mailcap` mailcap file

## Regex explained

According to [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Media_type), MIME-types start with a prefix describing the category, followed by a slash and ended with the exact type (consisting only of the letters `a-z`). The prefix must be one of the following:

* `application`
* `audio`
* `example` 
* `font` 
* `image` 
* `message` 
* `model` 
* `multipart` 
* `text` 
* `video` 
* `chemical` (unofficial)

The shell command uses the following regex, which matches against this definition. Again, it is stretched over two lines:
```
\b((?:application|audio|example|font|image|
message|model|multipart|text|video|chemical)/[a-z]+?)\b
```

What follows is kind of the abstract syntax tree of the regex. Please note, that it is written in the [perl regex dialect](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Regular_expression#Perl).

* `\b` word boundary, marks the beginning/end of a word.
* `(` start a first group
    * `(` start a second group...
        * `?:` ...but do not use the second group
        * `application` match for the exact word 
        * `|` or the next word and so on...
    * `)` close the second group
    * `/` match for a slash
    * `[a-z]` match for ordinary characters...
    * `+` ...more then once...
    * `?` ...but as less as possible. This is called non-greediness and is the reason why we have to use the advanced perl regex dialect.
* `)` close the first group
* `\b` look for the end of the word

This defines how a MIME-type looks like. The resulting list should only consist of all the well-formed MIME-types found in your mail. All you have to do is to complement the entries with their corresponding applications as in
```
application/pdf; evince %s;
```

Have a look at [this](https://linux.die.net/man/4/mailcap) for further understanding of mailcap.
